ABSTRACT
We introduce Adam, an algorithm for first-order gradient-based optimization of
stochastic objective functions. The method is straightforward to implement and is
based an adaptive estimates of lower-order moments of the gradients. The method
is computationally efficient, has little memory requirements and is well suited for
problems that are large in terms of data and/or parameters. The method is also appropriate for non-stationary objectives and problems with very noisy and/or sparse
gradients. The method exhibits invariance to diagonal rescaling of the gradients
by adapting to the geometry of the objective function. The hyper-parameters have
intuitive interpretations and typically require little tuning. Some connections to
related algorithms, on which Adam was inspired, are discussed. We also analyze
the theoretical convergence properties of the algorithm and provide a regret bound
on the convergence rate that is comparable to the best known results under the
online convex optimization framework. We demonstrate that Adam works well in
practice when experimentally compared to other stochastic optimization methods.
1 INTRODUCTION
Stochastic gradient-based optimization is of core practical importance in many fields of science and
engineering. Many problems in these fields can be cast as the optimization of some scalar parameterized objective function requiring maximization or minimization with respect to its parameters.
If the function is differentiable w.r.t. its parameters, a relatively efficient method of optimization is
gradient ascent, since the computation of first-order partial derivatives w.r.t. all the parameters is of
the same computational complexity as just evaluating the function. Often, objective functions are
stochastic. For example, many objective function are composed of a sum of subfunctions evaluated
at different subsamples of data; in this case optimization can be made more efficient by taking gradient steps w.r.t. individual subfunctions, i.e. stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or ascent. SGD
proved itself as an efficient and effective optimization method that was central in many machine
learning success stories, such as recent advances in deep learning Deng et al. (2013); Krizhevsky
et al.; Hinton & Salakhutdinov (2006); Hinton et al. (2012a); Graves et al. (2013). Objectives may
also have other sources of noise than data subsampling, such as dropout Hinton et al. (2012b) regularization. For all such noisy objectives, efficient stochastic optimization techniques are required.
The focus of this paper is on the optimization of stochastic objectives with high-dimensional parameters spaces. In these cases, higher-order optimization methods are ill-suited, and discussion in this
paper will be restricted to first-order methods.
We propose Adam, a method for efficient stochastic optimization that only requires first-order gradients and requires little memory. The method computes individual adaptive learning rates for different
parameters from estimates of first and second moments of the gradients; the name Adam is derived
from adaptive moment estimation. Our method is designed to combine the advantages of two recently popular methods: AdaGrad Duchi et al. (2011), which works well with sparse gradients, and
RMSProp Tieleman & Hinton (2012), which works well in on-line and non-stationary settings; important connections to these and other stochastic optimization methods are clarified in section 5.
Some of Adam’s advantages are that the magnitudes of parameter updates are invariant to rescaling
of the gradient, its stepsizes are approximately bounded by the stepsize hyperparameter, it does not
require a stationary objective, it works with sparse gradients, and it performs a form of automatic
annealing.